# Plant Leaf Disease Classification

This project focuses on the classification of plant leaf diseases using the EfficientNet B3 deep learning architecture.
## Abstract

Plants can be affected by various diseases.  Identifying and properly managing foliar plant diseases is important to ensure crop health and agricultural productivity. Conventional manual screening methods require extensive pathogen knowledge, and are labour-intensive and inefficient for large-scale agriculture. This work addresses these problems by developing YR2S (YOLO-Enhanced Rat Swarm Optimizer - Red Fox Optimization (RFO-ShuffleNetv2)), an efficient framework designed for accurate and efficient detection of plant leaf diseases. The framework incorporates state-of-the-art techniques including pre-processing using contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE), feature extraction using Pyramid Channel-based Feature Attention Network (PCFAN), anomaly detection using YOLOv7, and classification optimization using Enhanced Rat Swarm Optimizer (RSO) and ShuffleNetV2 [1].  In addition, the Red Fox optimization algorithm is used for disease classification. The proposed framework is evaluated on the ‘Plant Village Dataset’. This solves problems such as high parameters, slow detection and difficulty in identifying small and dense areas. This work contributes to precision agriculture by providing a robust and efficient solution for the automatic detection of plant leaf diseases, thereby promoting early intervention against diseases and reducing agricultural losses. There are several accurate and highly efficient techniques in the literature, but these need to be tested and deployed in real-time mobile applications and web services. So, a web-based tool is developed that allows the users to interact directly with the model. Therefore, farmers can also utilize these unconventional automatic plant disease detection models openly by taking photos of suspicious plant leaves.

## Dataset

We used the PlantVillage dataset, which contains 38 classes and 70,295 images of 14 different plant species. The dataset includes both healthy and diseased leaf images. Augmentation techniques were applied during training to obtain diverse images for each disease category.

The classifier can classify the following 33 classes:
- Apple (Apple Scab, Black Rot, Cedar Apple Rust, Healthy)
- Cherry (Powdery Mildew, Healthy)
- Corn (Gray Leaf Spot, Common Rust, Northern Leaf Blight, Healthy)
- Grape (Black Rot, Esca, Leaf Blight, Healthy)
- Peach (Bacterial Spot, Healthy)
- Pepper Bell
-and so on
## Usage

Run the notebooks to explore the following models:

1. **PCFAN for image preprocessing and noise removal**
- File: `PCFAN.ipynb`
- Description: This notebook does basic preprocessing for the dataset where the CLAHE was used for image preprocessing and PCFAN architecture was used for image denoising.

2. **ROI-Extraction form the images**
- File: `roi-extraction.ipynb`
- Description: The roi-extraction file was used to take the diseased region from the leaf images and further process them for roi-extraction we use the yolo architecture here we implement the object detection too. 

3. **YOLO implementaion**
- File: `yolov9.ipynb`
- Description: Yolov9 file was used for the regio extraction and object detection from the images and send the ROI to the next process of classification for the shufflenetv2 which uses the detected part of the leaf images for the training and classification procedure.

4. **Shufflenet-v2 implementation**
- Files: `shufflenetv2.ipynb`
- Description: Shufflenetv2 model architecture was used for the classification of the images of the plant village dataset which takes the input as the cropped regions from the yolo architecture and trains on those images alone for better feature extraction and increased accuracy and robustness of the model.

5. **SAM model for ROI-extraction**
- Files: `samplants.ipynb`
- Description: This notebook implements the facebook's segment anything model (SAM) which is used for mask generation and alse ROI extraction from the images and the output generated by the SAM can be used for the object detection process as we need masks to train the yolo model for it to perform the object detection with greater accuracy.

6. **Efficient-net implementation**
- Files: `efficientnetplants.ipynb`
- Description: This notebook changes the procedure which we hace used above here the image preprocessing is done with CLAHE and PCFAN but the object detection and the roi-extraction part was omitted and the efficient-net was used which gives better accuracy compared to the shufflenet-v2 model.
